---
layout: post
title: ActiveRecord Should Ask For More Than ID
---

This post is targeted at Rails developers who use [`ActiveRecord`][AR] with, obviously, a relational
database that allows setting functions as a columns default. [PostgreSQL] for example.

## What We Wanted

I took part in discussions of an [issue][deffunc] that led to `ActiveRecord` migrations accepting
and delegating column default values to a native database function. PostgreSQL already had this.
For as long as I've used it, it's been possible to set the default value of a column to a function,
either one that comes with PostgreSQL, an extension, or a custom procedure. ActiveRecord just didn't
have the facility to do that. Well, you could still `execute` your way to this desired state.

This was our past (with the mandatory `down` migration specification since we called `execute`):

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
class CreatePosts < ActiveRecord::Migration
  def up
    create_table :posts do |t|
      t.string :title

      t.timestamps
    end
    execute <<~SQL
      alter table posts
        alter title
        set default some_function()
    SQL
  end

  def down
    drop_table :posts
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

And this is our present and future (which I love so much):

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
class CreatePosts < ActiveRecord::Migration[5.2]
  def change
    create_table :posts do |t|
      t.string :title, default: -> { "some_function()" }

      t.timestamps
    end
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

Now it's easier to set a database function as the default value of a column using an automatically
reversible migration. Lots to love, and a proper thank you is in order to whoever worked on it.

Solving this problem led to another. If you read the comments on the [issue][deffunc], you'll see
what I'm talking about. A new [issue][returning] has been created to address it.  That is what I
address in this post.

## The Database As A Dumb Store

An ORM, like every other abstraction, tries to live by the true meaning of the word [abstraction].
It doesn't demand of you a blind trust but rather it _demands_ that you think of your database,
sorry persistence layer (and this is the first pitfall), as, you guessed it, a _persistence_ layer.
The place where you store stuff that survive a crash, shutdown, or anything else that makes the
computer lose its memory.

Unfortunately the database isn't a dumb store. As the server tasked with ensuring storage and
integrity of data, it gets to have the last word.  And rightly so. It shouldn't (and doesn't)
delegate this responsibility to any application (or layer) above it. It would be irresponsible and
lazy of the database if didn't perform this task.

What this means is that a couple of validations in your `ActiveRecord` model isn't enough to ensure
data integrity. Technically, bad data could still end up in your database.

It also means that when you send a valid query to the database it might not even get the chance to
run. It could be summarily aborted or heavily modified before it's applied. There's not much to
worry about when the query is aborted. As far as I can tell, `ActiveRecord` will behave
appropriately. It is when the query is modified that things could take a bad turn because of
`ActiveRecord`'s confidence that it knows what the database will do with such a query. This is not
hubris—it's all good intentions.  After all it's an abstraction, one that requires you to not pay a
lot of attention if any at all to the underlying database, vague-ified as the _persistence layer_.

## Pitfalls

`ActiveRecord`'s confidence is a pitfall. In most cases it does exactly what you want it to. You
start fighting (and eventually hating) it when you have columns with default values generated by the
database during insert and/or columns whose eventual value is affected by the result of a trigger.

## What You Insert/Update Is Not What Is Stored

Remember when we said that the database, as part of its job to ensure data integrity, determines the
fate of all queries (and their values) it receives? If a query isn't aborted but run, then the
eventual values stored could be very different than what was originally submitted. Let's look at two
of such cases.

### Function Defaults

When the default of a column is a function (such as `now()`, [`gen_random_uuid()`][gen_rand], etc)
the stored value is generated at _insert-time_ (to use the _compile-time_, _runtime_ lingo).
Function defaults are awesome. `gen_random_uuid()` might be the most popular but stored procedures
are easy to write, can be as complex as needed, and are tucked away in the database. But
`ActiveRecord` punishes you for using a strength of the database.

### Triggers

Triggers are like a Pub/Sub system. They allow you to listen to events and perform actions before or
after they're applied. The staple of trigger examples is audit tables (tables that keep history of
changes to other tables). A rather simple example is normalizing some column values before they're
stored. For example, lowercasing email addresses before they're stored. Where they usually shine is
complex validations which depend on values in different tables. I've used them liberally this way
and enjoyed the benefit of keeping logic close to the data they work on. If you haven't used
triggers before take a look at them. Again, `ActiveRecord` punishes you for using this incredible
database feature.

### What's A Programmer To Do

The database has a mechanism of telling you what was the eventual values stored. It's the
[`returning`][pg_ret] clause that you can tuck to the end of your SQL query to specify which values
should be returned from the result of the query.  `returning *`, just like `select *`, returns the
entire row, and these are the truest values, which is what you'd expect when you've successfully
inserted a new row or updated an existing one.  But not with `ActiveRecord`.


### How `ActiveRecord` Punishes

Take for example the User model below. `token` has a database function as default, while the `email`
column's value is trimmed and lowered before it is inserted or updated.

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
class CreateUsers < ActiveRecord::Migration[5.2]
  def change
    create_table :users do |t|
      t.string :email, null: false
      t.string :token, null: false, default: -> { "gen_random_uuid()" }

      t.timestamps
    end

    reversible do |dir|
      dir.up do
        execute <<-SQL
          create or replace function lower_trim_email()
          returns trigger as $$
          begin
            new.email = lower(trim(new.email));
            return new;
          end;
          $$ language plpgsql;

          create trigger trg_lower_trim_email
          before insert or update of email on users
          for each row
          execute procedure lower_trim_email();
        SQL
      end

      dir.down do
        execute "drop trigger trg_lower_trim_email on users"
        execute "drop function lower_trim_email()"
      end
    end
  end
end
{% endhighlight %}

{% highlight ruby %}
user = User.create(email: "  HeLLo@exaMPLe.oRg   ")
puts user.email # "  HeLLo@exaMPLe.oRg   "
puts user.token # nil
{% endhighlight %}

What happened here? During an `insert`, `ActiveRecord` only asks for the autogenerated `id` back
from the database. Thus, while a trimmed and lowercased email address was stored in the database,
the application continues to use the original. Even worse, the user object doesn't have its `token`
set. The workaround is to immediately reload the model `after_{create,save}`, and that's two queries
already where one would suffice:

{% highlight ruby linenos %}
class Post < ApplicationRecord
  after_save :reload

  # If you only have default values and no triggers
  # that affect updates then use after_create instead.
  # after_create :reload
end
{% endhighlight %}

During an update, you can forget about what your triggers did to the values. There is no `RETURNING`
clause, even for the specific values that were changed. This can produce a conflict where you work
with one value in your application but have another in the database. In the above example it does.

### The `ActiveRecord` Way

If immediately reloading models after save bothers you then don't use database functions as default
values. And don't use triggers either. Embrace `ActiveRecord` fully and do as it expects: set the
defaults in the model, transform the attribute values (like trimming and lowercasing) before
persisting.

I look forward to what the resolution of this new [issue][returning] will bring. It's more complex
than just writing the code to attach `RETURNING *` to the generated insert or update query. What I
wish for is a directive on a model (in the manner of `abstract_class`) that marks a model as one
relying on database features such as described above.


_Got comments or corrections for factual errors?  There's a [Hacker News thread for that][SaveHN]_.

[AR]: https://guides.rubyonrails.org/active_record_basics.html
[PostgreSQL]: https://postgresql.org
[deffunc]: https://github.com/rails/rails/issues/21627
[returning]: https://github.com/rails/rails/issues/34237
[abstraction]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abstraction_(computer_science)
[pg_ret]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/dml-returning.html
[gen_rand]: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/10/static/pgcrypto.html#id-1.11.7.35.9
[SaveHN]: https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=18271304
